---
layout: article

permalink: /notes/c/

title: "C"

subtitle: "Basic Syntax"

excerpt: "Basic Syntax for C."

categories: notes

date: 2018-02-07
---

{% include /globalSections/toc.html %}

C is a general purpose language which has been closely associated with the UNIX operating system for which it was developed - since the system and most of the programs that run it are written in C.

## Getting Started

#### The main() Function

The beginning of every C program is the `main()` function. The `main()` function is like any other programming function in that it groups like activities and can take in parameters (information) and pass back values (again, information). **What makes the `main()` function unique from other functions, is that the values it returns are returned to the operating system.**

```c
int main() {

  return 0;
}
```

#### Importing Libraries

To import a library use the following syntax: `#include <stdio.h>`. Commonly used libraries are:

- `<stdio.h>`: standard input output library (`printf()`, `scanf()`, etc.).
- `<stdlib.h>`: standard library (`rand()`, `srand()`, etc.).
- `<time.h>`: time handling functions (`time()`, `clock()`, etc.).
- `<string.h>`: string handling functions (`strcpy()`, `strcat()`, `strlen()`, etc.).
- `<math.h>`: common mathematical functions (`abs()`, `nan()`, `log2()`, `log10()`, `sqrt()`, `sin()`, `pow()`, etc.).
- `ctype.h`: set of functions used to classify characters by their types and more (`isdigit()`, `islower()`, `isalpha()`, `toupper()`, etc.).

## Data Types

- integers, `int`.
- floating-point numbers, `float`.
- characters, `char`.

To prevent unwanted data from appearing in your newly created variables, initialize them:

```c
// declare and initialize variables
int x = 0;
char firstInitial = '\0'; // '\0' is known as null character. must use single quotes
```

#### Printing Variable Contents

Use the `printf()` function from the `<stdio.h>` library to print content. Use conversion specifiers which define the type of data to be printed on standard output. Also used when getting input from the user using the `scanf()` function from the same library.

- `%d`: Displays an integer value
- `%f`: Displays a floating-point value
- `%c`: Displays a character (or symbol)
- `%lf`: Displays a double value
- `%%`: Displays a % character

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
  int someValue = 0;

  printf("Enter an Integer value: ");
  scanf("%d", &someValue);

  return 0;
}
```

#### Arithmetic

C enables programmers to perform all types of arithmetic. This includes the basics:

- `*`: multiplication.
- `/`: division.
- `%`: modulus (remainder).
- `+`: addition.
- `-`: subtraction.

#### Random Numbers

>To generate a specific random set of numbers, say between 1 and x, you need to define a formula using `rand()` function:

```c
randomNumber = (rand() % x) + 1;
```

However, it produces the same sequence of random numbers repeatedly. **`srand()` takes an integer number as its starting point for randomizing.** To give your program a true sense of randomizing, **pass the current time as a function using the `time()` function**. Also, note that the **`time()` function requires an argument, which can be `NULL`**. These functions can be **included from the libraries `<stdlib.h>` and `<time.h>`**.

```c
srand(time(NULL));
```

## Conditions

>Conditions (often called *program control*, *decisions*, or *expressions*) allow you to make decisions about program directions.

#### The If Structure

The structure of an if statement:

```c
if (statement is true)
  // execute this line of code;
else
  // execute this;
```

>Note that if there are multiple statements to be executed inside the body of the condition, curly braces are needed.

```c
if (statement is true) {
  // execute this line;
  // and this line;
} else if (statement is true) {
  // execute this line;
  // and this line; 
} else {
  // execute this line;
  // and this line;
}
```

#### The Switch Structure

>Switch case statements are a *substitute for long if statements* that compare a variable to several "integral" values ("integral" values are simply values that can be expressed as an integer, such as the value of a char).

```c
switch (someVariable) {
  case thisValue:
    // code to execute if someVariable == thisValue;
    break;
  case thatValue:
    // code to execute if someVariable == thatValue;
    break;
  ...
  default:
    // code to execute if someVariable does not equal the value following any of the cases;
    break;
}
```

>Note that the `break` statement inside a `case` block, stops the `switch` statement from evaluating any further `case` statements. The `default` block can be used to catch any input that does not match the `case` statements.

## Looping

>Loops are used to repeat a block of code.

The `++` operator is useful for incrementing number based variables by one, and the `--` operator is useful for decrementing number based variables by one. You can place the `++` or `--` first or last. Note that the `++x` operation is not guaranteed to occur first before the `x` and `x++` are processed.

#### The For Loop Structure

>For loops are useful when you know how many iterations you need for your loop.

```c
for (variable initialization; condition; variable update) {
  // code to execute while the condition is true;
}
```

#### The While Loop Structure

>The while loop is very simple it executes as while a condition is true. Watch for infinite loops.

```c
while (condition) { 
  // code to execute for when the condition is true;
}
```

#### Do While Loop Structure

>The do while loop is similar to the while loop except it is executed at least once before the condition is evaluated. Then it executes while the condition is true.

```c
do {
  // code to execute once, and then while the condition is true;
} while (condition);
```

#### Break and Continue

>Two keywords that are very important to looping are `break` and `continue`.

The `break` command will exit the most immediately surrounding loop regardless of what the conditions of the loop are. `break` is useful if we want to exit a loop under special circumstances.

If you are executing a loop and hit a `continue` statement, the loop will stop its current iteration, update itself (in the case of for loops) and begin to execute again from the top. Essentially, the `continue` statement is saying "this iteration of the loop is done, let's `continue` with the loop without executing whatever code comes after me."

## Functions

>Structured programming enables programmers to break problems into small and easily understood components that eventually will comprise a complete system.

#### Function Prototypes

>Function prototypes tell C how your function will be built and used. **It is a common programming practice to construct your function prototype before the actual function is built.**

```c
void printBalance(int); // function prototype. defines a function that doesn't return a value, but accepts one integer parameter.
int createRandomNumber(void); // function prototype. defines a function that returns an integer value, but accepts no parameters.
int addTwoNumbers(int, int); // function prototype. defines a function that returns an integer value, and accepts two integer parameters.
```

#### Function Definitions

>**Function definitions implement the function prototype.** The first line of the function definition (also known as the header) resembles the function prototype.

```c
int addTwoNumbers(int numOne, int numTwo) {
  return numOne + numTwo;
}
```

#### Function Calls

To put your function to work you have to call it.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int addTwoNumbers(int, int);

int main() {
  int result;
  
  result = addTwoNumbers(2, 3);
  printf("%d\n", result);
  
  return 0;
}

int addTwoNumbers(int numOne, int numTwo) {
  return numOne + numTwo;
}
```

#### Scope

**Variable scope** identifies and determines the life span of any variable in any programming language. When a variable loses its scope, it means its data value is lost. **Local variables** are defined in functions, and lose their scope each time the function is executed. Locally scoped variables can be reused in other functions without harming one anothers contents. At times, however, you might want to share data between and across functions. To support the concept of sharing data, you can create and use **global variables**. Global variables are created and defined outside any function. *Not a good idea to use global variables, because you lose control when everyone has access.*

## Arrays

>Arrays allow you to build collections of like variables.

```c
float avengers[30]; // float data type array with up to 30 elements
double results[3]; // double data type array with up to 3 elements
short salaries[9]; // short data type array with up to 9 elements
char name[19]; // char array with up to 18 character elements and one null character
```

Initialize an array by the following:

```c
int someArray[5] = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4};
```

#### Equivalent Ways to Declare Arrays

There are a number of different ways to declare arrays in C. All of the following are equivalent (this becomes even more relevant when strings are discussed):

```c
char ch[10] = {'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o'};
char ch[10] = {"hello"};
char ch[10] = "hello";
char ch[10] = {'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0', '\0', '\0', '\0', '\0'};
```

#### Two Dimensional Arrays

Two dimensional arrays are created similar to one-dimensional arrays, but with one exception: two-dimensional arrays must be declared with two separate element numbers (think of number of columns and number of rows).

```c
int someTwoDimensionalArray[3][3] = {% raw %}{{0, 1, 2}, {3, 4, 5}, {6, 7, 8}};{% endraw %}
```

## Pointers

>Pointers is what makes C one of the most robust languages in the computing industry for building unparalleled efficient and powerful programs.

Pointers are very powerful structures that can be used by C programmers to work with variables, functions, and data structures through their **memory addresses**. Pointers are variables that most often contain a memory address as their value. In other words, a **pointer variable contains a memory address that points to another variable**.

#### Declaring and Initializing Pointer Variables

>Pointer variables must be declared before they can be used. Simply place the **indirection operator, `*`** in front of the variable name to declare a pointer.

```c
int age = 30;
int *pointToAge; // this is a pointer but isnt pointing to anything
```

To indirectly reference a value through a pointer, you must assign an address to the pointer. The unary operator, `&`, is often referred to as the "address of" operator, because in the below case, my pointer `pointToAge` is receiving the "address of" `age`.

```c
pointToAge = &age;
```

Pointer variables should always be initialized with another variables memory address, or with `0`, or with the keyword `NULL`.

```c
int x = 0;
int *pointerOne;
int *pointerTwo;
int *pointerThree;

pointerOne = &x;
pointerTwo = 0;
pointerThree = NULL;
```

To print the memory address of pointers and non-pointer variables using the `%p` conversion specifier.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
  
  int x = 17;
  int *myPointer;
  
  myPointer = &x;
  
  printf("\nmyPointer has memory address %p, and value %d.", myPointer, *myPointer);
  printf("\nx has memory address %p, and value %d.\n", &x, x);
  
  return 0;
}

// myPointer has memory address 0x7ffee411cb48, and value 17.
// x has memory address 0x7ffee411cb48, and value 17.
```

#### Functions and Pointers

One of the greatest benefits of using pointers is the ability to pass arguments to functions by reference. By default, arguments are passed by value in C, which involves making a copy of the incoming argument for the function to use. 

>Passing arguments by value is not the most efficient programming means for programming in C. When C passes arguments by value you are unable to modify the original contents of the incoming parameters.

To pass arguments by reference, you need to be aware of a few subtle differences in the previous code. The first noticeable difference is in the function prototype:

```c
void demoPassByReference(int *);
```

C is told that the function will take a pointer as an argument by the `*` operator after the data type. The next slight difference is in the function call, which passes the memory address of the variable `x` by placing the unary `&` operator in front of the variable:

```c
demoPassByReference(&x);
```

The other indirection activities are preformed in the function implementation where I tell the function header to expect an incoming parameter (pointer) that points to an integer value. **This is known as passing by reference!**

```c
void demoPassByReference(int *ptrX) {}
```

To modify the original contents of the argument, the indirection operator, `*`, must be used, which tells C to access the contents of the memory location contained in the pointer variable.

```c
*ptrX += 5;
```

Lastly, the `printf()` function prints the pointers contents:

```c
printf("\nThe value of x is now: %d\n", *ptrX);
```

If the indirection operator `*`, isn't placed in front of a pointer in a print statement that displays a number with the `%d` conversion specifier, C will print a numeric representation of the pointer address.

```c
printf("\nThe value of x is now: %d\n", ptrX); //this is wrong 
printf("\nThe value of x is now: %d\n", *ptrX); //this is right
```

Note that it is necessary to place an ampersand, `&` ("address of" operator), in front of variables in the `scanf()` functions, because the address operator provides the `scanf()` function the memory address to which C should write the data type in from the user.

#### Passing Arrays to Functions

Arrays are groupings of contiguous memory segments and the array name itself is a pointer to the first memory location in the contiguous memory segment.

You can build your function prototype to receive an array as an argument by placing empty brackets in the argument list:

```c
int nameLength(char []);
```

This function prototype tells C to expect an array as an argument, and the function will receive the first memory address in the array. When calling the function, only pass the array name:

```c
printf("%d characters\n", nameLength(aName));
```

Note the "address of" operator, `&` is not used in front of the array name in the `scanf()` function. *This is because an array name in C already contains a memory address, which is the address of the first element in the array.*

#### The Const Qualifier

There are times when you will want the power and speed of passing arguments by reference without the security risk of changing a variable's (argument) contents. C programmers can accomplish this with the `const` qualifier. Recall, that the `const` qualifier allows you to create read-only arguments while still achieving the pass by reference capability.

## Strings

>C programmers can create and initialize a string using a character array and a terminating `NULL` character

```c
char myString[8] = {'M', 'a', 't', 't', 'h', 'e', 'w', '\0'};
```

When creating character arrays, it is important to allocate enough room for the `NULL` character because many C library functions look for the `NULL` character when processing character arrays. If the `NULL` character is not found, some C library functions may not produce the desired result. The above variable can also be created and initialized with a *string literal*.

```c
char myString[] = "Matthew";
```

This creates the necessary number of memory elements - in this case it is 8 including the `NULL` character. Note that **string literals are a series of characters surrounded by double quotes**. It is important to know that strings are implemented as a pointer to a segment of memory. More specifically, string names are really just pointers that point to the first character's memory address in a string. Consider the following:

```c
char *myString = "Matthew";
```

This statement declares a pointer variable and assigns the string literal `"Matthew"` to the first and subsequent memory locations that the pointer variable `myString` points to. In other words, *the pointer variable `myString` points to the first character in the string `"Matthew"`.

#### Reading and Printing Strings

**To read and print a character array use the `%s` conversion specifier.**

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
  char color[12] = {'\0'};
  
  printf("\nEnter your favorite color: ");
  scanf("%s", color);
  printf("You entered %s as your favorite color!\n\n", color);
  
  return 0;
}

// Enter your favorite color: yellow
// You entered yellow as your favorite color!
```

#### String Handling Functions

- `atof()`: this function **converts a string to a floating-point number**
- `atoi()`: this function **converts a string to an integer**
- `strlen()`: the *string length* function (from `<string.h>` library) takes a reference to a string and **returns the numeric length** up to, but not including, the `NULL` or terminating character
- `tolower()` and `toupper()`: these functions (from `<ctype.h>` library) provide an easy way to **convert a single character to either uppercase or lowercase**. To convert an array of characters you can use a loop with these functions
- `strcpy()`: this function **copies the contents of one string into another string**. It takes two strings as arguments. The first argument is the string to be copied into and the second argument is the string that will be copied from. After copying string two into string one, the function returns the value of string one
- `strcat()`: his function **takes two strings and concatenates one string to another**. After concatenating the two strings, argument one and argument two, the function returns the new value in string one, or the first argument


## Data Structures

Structures are an important computer science concept because they are used throughout the programming and IT world in applications such as relational databases, file-processing, and object-oriented programming concepts. Considered a data type much like an integer or character, structures are more frequently referred to as *data structures*. **Structures are a collection of variables related in nature, but not necessarily in data type. Structures are most commonly used to define an object.**

The first process in creating a structure is to build the structure definition using the `struct` keyword followed by braces, with individual variables defined as members.

```c
struct math {
  int x;
  int y;
  int result;
};
```

When structure definitions are created using the `struct` keyword, memory is not allocated for the structure until an *instance* of the structure is created. Creating an instance of a structure is really just creating a variable, in this case a variable of structure type. You can *initialize* a structure instance the same way you would initialize an array:

```c
struct math aProblem = {0, 0, 0};
```

Only after an instance of the structure has been created can members of the structure be accessed via the dot operation, `.`, also known as *dot notation*. You can also use dot notation to print.

```c
aProblem.x = 10;
aProblem.y = 10;
aProblem.result = 20;

printf("\nResult: %d\n", aProblem.result);
```

#### typedef

The `typedef` keyword is used for creating **structure definitions to build an alias relationship with the structure tag (structure name)**. It provides a shortcut for programmers when creating instances of the structure.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

typedef struct employee {  // modification here
  char fname[10];
  char lname[10];
  int id;
  float salary;
} emp;  // modification here

int main() {
  // create instance of employee structure using emp
  emp emp1; // modification here
  
  //assign values to members
  strcpy(emp1.fname, "Matthew");
  strcpy(emp1.lname, "Long");
  emp1.id = 123;
  emp1.salary = 90000.00;
  
  // print member contents
  printf("\nFirst Name: %s\n", emp1.fname);
  printf("Last Name: %s\n", emp1.lname);
  printf("Employee ID: %d\n", emp1.id);
  printf("Salary: $%.2f\n", emp1.salary);
  
  return 0;
}

// First Name: Matthew
// Last Name: Long
// Employee ID: 123
// Salary: $90000.00
```

The `typedef` keyword is used in the first line of the structure definition. The next modification is at the end of the structure which is where C is told what name such as `emp` as the **alias** for the employee structure.

The `struct` keyword is no longer needed when creating instances of the employee structure.

```c
emp emp1; // can do this
struct employee emp1; // instead of this
```

#### Arrays of Structures

To create an array of structures, supply the desired number of array elements surrounded by brackets after the structure definition:

```c
typedef struct employee {
  char fname[10];
  char lname[10];
  int id;
  float salary;
} emp;

emp emp1[5];
```

#### Passing Structures to Functions

*Passing by value protects an incoming variable's value by sending a copy of the original data rather than the actual variable to the function.* Like any parameter passed by value, C makes a `copy` of the incoming structure variable for the function to use. Any modifications made to the parameter within the receiving function are not made to the original variable's value. To pass a structure by value to a function, you need only to supply the function prototype and function definition with the structure tag (or the alias if `typedef` is used).

*Passing by reference sends a variable's memory address to a function, which allows statements in the function to modify the original variable's memory contents.* Passing structures by reference requires a bit more knowledge and adherence to C rules and regulations. Before learning how to pass structures by reference, its necessary to learn another means of accessing members of structures. **Members can be accessed via the structure pointer operator, `->`.** The structure pointer operator is a dash followed by the greater-than sign with no spaces in between.

#### Unions

Unions are similar to structures in design and use, unions provide a more economical way to build objects with attributes (members) that are not required to be in use at the same time. 

>Whereas structures reserve separate memory segments for each member when they are created, a union reserves a single memory space for its largest member, thereby providing a memory-saving feature for members to share the same memory space.

```c
union phoneBook {
  char *name;
  char *number;
  char *address;
};
```

#### Type Casting

Although it is not supported by all high-level programming languages, type casting is a powerful feature of C. **Type casting enables C programmers to force one variable of a certain type to be another type, an important consideration especially when dealing with integer division.**

```c
int x = 12;
int y = 5;
float result = 0;

result = (float) x / (float) y;
```

