---
layout: article

permalink: /notes/redux/

title: "Redux"

subtitle: "Treehouse - Learn React"

excerpt: "Redux is a state management framework that provides a robust infrastructure that complements React applications."

categories: notes

modified: 2017-10-27
---

{% include /globalSections/toc.html %}

Redux is a state management framework that provides a robust infrastructure that complements React applications.

Redux is a popular JavaScript framework that maintains and manages application state in a scalable, predictable and testable way. This is accomplished by following a basic set of principles, along with some simple design patterns and by keeping application state in a single container.

What you'll find is that Redux will make your applications robust, scalable, and maintainable, which are all critical to making your app production ready.

## Why Redux?

Redux does add substantial overhead to your project and expects you to follow some very explicit patterns.

First, Redux does not require that you use React as your view library. However, React and Redux align themselves almost perfectly.

When you use Redux with React, Redux handles all your data management while React only manages the presentation and the views of your app.

Redux is an opinionated framework meaning it expects you to do things a specific way. This is good for a number of reasons.

<ul>
  <li>Developers familiar with Redux will understand the structure of other apps using Redux.</li>
  <li>Consistent patterns make debugging and testing your application easier.</li>
</ul>

Redux is overkill if your application is relatively small and doesn't manage much data. Read more on </a href="https://medium.com/@dan_abramov/you-might-not-need-redux-be46360cf367#.1trmk9tu5">why you might not need Redux</a>.

## Redux Initial Setup

To get started with Redux you should install it and save it as a dependancy using `npm install --save redux react-redux`.

#### Quiz

Question: What is the React-Redux library?

Answer: It provides a number of helper methods that make it easier to connect Redux to your React application.

Question: Redux is a JavaScript framework that is an alternative to React.

Answer: False. Both React and Redux align themselves almost perfectly. Redux handles data management, while React manages the presentation of your app.

Question: Redux expects you to implement features a specific way, otherwise your application will not work as you would expect.

Answer: True. Redux is an opinionated framework. Following a consistent pattern makes it easier for developers familiar to Redux to understand the application structure of any Redux app.

Question: Redux maintains and manages application ____ in a scalable and predictable way.

Answer: state

Question: Why does Redux make your application more reliable and stable?

Answer: Redux provides a single source of truth for your application, making it easier to keep application state in sync and distribute data.

Question: Do React applications require that you use Redux?

Answer: No. For simple React apps that only use minimal React componenets, Redux can be overkill. Make sure that your app wil benefit from using Redux.

## Developing Your Component Hierarchy

#### Quiz

Question: A pure component is:

Answer: A component known as a stateless function in React because it does not manage its own state.

Question: When building large-scale application, it's wise to draw out the UI and break it down by components.

Answer: True

Question: You may only have one container componenet in an application.

Answer: False. You may have several container componeents that propagate data down to presentational componenets.

Question: What is a good pattern to follow when building your components?

Answer: Start with componenets that have no dependency on other componenets and work backwards from there.

Question: Which of the following is true about logical componenets?

Answer: not redux aware, they can be exported as a module, they will often render a view but will also take part in React lifecycle events and/or manage an internal state.

Question: What are advantages of breaking an application into modules?

Answer: Easier to maintain and debug code

Question: When working with Redux, you're required to separate your React componenets into their own files.

Answer: False

Question: Defining all componenets in one location works for a short demo, but what are some of the issues you will encounter when the application begins to grow?

Answer: Managing the monolithic file will become unweildy, if you decide to break up the file at a later point, it will probably be error-prone and time-consuming, and debugging and testing will be more difficult.

Question: Which of the following is not true about modules:

Answer: Modules require advanced knowledge of JavaScript

Question: Why should you break your React componenets into modules?

Answer: It provides separation of UI responsibilities and better scalability

## Intro to Action Types

If data is going to be used by a single component it is probably best not to use Redux.

Actions are payloads of information that send data from your application to your store. Actions are plain JavaScript objects.

To start with action types you first create a folder inside the `src` folder. Name it `actionTypes`.

You will then export the data you need. For example:

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
export const ADD_PLAYER = 'player/ADD_PLAYER';
export const REMOVE_PLAYER = 'player/REMOVE_PLAYER';
export const UPDATE_PLAYER_SCORE = 'player/UPDATE_PLAYER_SCORE';
{% endhighlight %}

## Intro to Reducers

A reducer is a Redux construct that is responsible for maintaining a specific portion of the Redux store, which holds the apps state. In JavaScript, a reducer is implemented as a pure function that takes two arguments, the current state and the action being taken, and produces the next state. In order for Redux to work properly, 
Reducers must not mutate the current state. In other words, the state for a reducer must be treated as immutable.

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
import * as PlayerActionTypes from '../actiontypes/player';

const initialState = [
  {
    name: 'Jim Hoskins',
    score: 31,
  },
  {
    name: 'Andrew Chalkley',
    score: 20,
  },
  {
    name: 'Alena Holligan',
    score: 50,
  },
];

export default function Player(state=initialState, action) {
  switch(action.type) {
    case PlayerActionTypes.ADD_PLAYER:
      return [
        ...state,
        {
          name: action.name,
          score: 0
        }
      ];
      
    case PlayerActionTypes.REMOVE_PLAYER:
      return [
        ...state.slice(0, action.index),
        ...state.slice(action.index + 1)
      ];
      
    case PlayerActionTypes.UPDATE_PLAYER_SCORE:
      return state.map((player, index) => {
        if(index === action.index) {
          return {
            ...player,
            score: player.score + action.score
          };
        }
        return player;
      });
      
    default:
      return state;
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

#### Quiz

Question: What is the rolw of a reducer?

Answer: Interpret the actions that occur within your app and produce a new state for specific data

Question: In Redux, an action returns a new state via a:

Answer: Reducer

Question: A reducer should be implemented as a pure function.

Answer: True

Question: You write a reducer as a pure function that takes which two arguments:

Answer: The current state and the action taken

Question: In a reducer's `switch` statement, what should be default `case` return?

Answer: The current state

## Actions and Action Creators

An Action is an event that will result in a change in the underlying state.

Submitting an Action to Redux:

<ul>
  <li>An action creator generates an action</li>
  <li>The action is dispatched to the Redux store</li>
  <li>The store holds your application state and it's where a reducer handles the action</li>
  <li>The reducer passes the action to a component and returns a new state</li>
</ul>

## The Road Travelled Thus Far

A Reducer is a Redux construct that is responsible for maintaining a specific portion of the Redux store. In JavaScript, a reducer is implemented as a pure function that takes two arguments, the current state and the action being taken, and produces the next state. In order for Redux to work properly, Reducers must not mutate the current state. In otehr words, the state for a reducer must be treated as immutable.

Actions are explicit events that occur in out application represented by a type and any relevant metadata associated with the action.

Action creators in Redux, are a construct for generating an action.

#### Quiz

Question: What is the Redux store?

Answer: The single source of truth for the application state

Question: An action in Redux refers to:

Answer: An event that Redux uses to determine how application state will be affected

Question: An action creator is used to:

Answer: Generate an action that gets dispatched to the Redux store.

Question: An action is usually comprised of a type and ____.

Answer: Metadata used to determine how application state will be affected

Question: Which of the following is an example of an action type:

Answer: `const  SELECT_PLAYER ='player/SELECT_PLAYER'`

Question: Immutability is one of the key principles of Redux, which is achieved by implementing reducers as ____ functions that do not mutate state.

Answer: pure

## Creating the Redux Store

Creating the <a href="http://redux.js.org/docs/api/Store.html">Redux Store</a> can be done with the `Provider` and `createStore` components imported from `react-redux` and `redux` respectively. You then wrap the rendered components with `<Provider>`:

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
render (
  <Provider store={store}>
    <Scoreboard />
  </Provider>
)
{% endhighlight %}

By wrapping our application with the provider component we've created a method for any container component to subscribe to Redux data changes, which is essential for passing data down to other components.

#### Quiz

Question: When connecting to Redux, you must provide:

Answer: A method for `mappingStateToProps`, and a container

Question: A bound action creator works exactly like a normal action creator, but in addition to generating an action, the action generated is also dispatched to the Redux store immediately.

Answer: True

Question: When creating bound action creators using the `bindActionCreators` method, we have to supply an action creator and ____.

Answer: The `dispatch` method

Question: When passing bound action creators as props to other components, you have to explicity pass `dispatch` as a prop as well.

Answer: False

Question: A container uses the ____ helper method in order to tie into the Redux pipeline.

Answer: `connect`

Question: Which feature in Redux DevTools lets you step forward and backward through application state?

Answer: The slider feature

Question: The `createStore()` method ____.

Answer: registers your reducers with Redux, and creates a Redux store that holds your apps state.

Question: If youre building a React application, you should always use Redux.

Answer: False

Question: You can use Redux DevTools to dispatch actions, without having to interact with the application UI.

Answer: True

Question: Redux provides a(n) ____ state container.

Answer: predictable

